https://www.rferl.org/a/russia-zhirinovsky-dead/31788517.html
 Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the rabid Russian nationalist lawmaker whose political rise in the early 1990s frightened the West and underscored the fragility of democracy in the immediate post-Soviet period, has died. He was 75. Russian State Duma speaker Vyacheslav Volodin said Zhirinovsky died after a "long and serious illness." Zhirinovsky had been in a Moscow hospital since early February after testing positive for COVID-19 and developing pneumonia. Zhirinovsky had been one of the most visible and well-known figures in Russian politics over the past three decades, capturing domestic and international headlines with his xenophobic comments and outlandish public behavior, including fistfights in parliament and on television talk shows.

He had been a prominent fixture in the Duma, the lower house of parliament, since his misleadingly named Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR) stormed to a strong result in 1993, capturing the most votes in the first legislative elections since the collapse of the Soviet Union two years earlier.

He ran for president five times after that, never receiving 10 percent of the vote. And while he frequently raised fears with his provocative pronouncements in his early years in the spotlight, he later struggled even to raise eyebrows, as Russians became accustomed to his remarks and his role in the ruling apparatus.

He appeared to have lost almost all of his real political influence years ago, serving instead as a colorfully controversial but ultimately predictable piece of the so-called “systemic opposition” to President Vladimir Putin, who uses this group to advance his goals and preserve a veneer of democracy and pluralism. Zhirinovsky rose to prominence in the early 1990s by playing on widespread disillusionment among the Russian populace with the economic and political upheaval that set in before the Soviet collapse and deepened following the country’s demise in December 1991.

The rapid transition to a market economy under President Boris Yeltsin cast many Russians into poverty as factories shut down, inflation skyrocketed, and the communist-era social safety net, threadbare as it was, unraveled.

In the December 1993 parliamentary elections, many citizens expressed their opposition to both Yeltsin and the Communist Party by voting for Zhirinovsky, who offered little in the way of a practical solution to those problems.

Zhirinovsky’s platform called for lowering the price of vodka, “defending the rights” of ethnic Russians inside and outside the country, and incorporating former imperial lands.

He also threatened the use of nuclear weapons against former adversaries – just one of a growing number of aggressive, often over-the-top positions he took publicly -- while blaming the West for many of the nation’s ills.

“Less a party than a backdrop to its demagogic leader Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the [LDPR] espoused ultranationalist positions, including anti-Western rhetoric; expanding Russia’s borders to include Poland and Finland, and eventually reaching the Indian Ocean; increasing arms sales abroad and restoring ties with traditional Soviet allies like Iraq and Libya; intensified support for Serbia; ridding Russia of non-Russians; provoking ethnic wars outside Russia; and warning Japan, Germany, and the United States of nuclear attack or blackmail,” the U.S. Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe said in a January 1994 report analyzing the election.

The LDPR won nearly 23 percent of the party-list votes in the election, besting liberal opponents and raising fears among those Western officials who were hoping that democracy would swiftly take hold in Russia after centuries of autocratic rule. Zhirinovsky’s strong showing in the election prompted some observers at the time to draw comparisons to Adolf Hitler, who had won over disgruntled voters with his virulent nationalism during a similar period of deep economic and political turmoil in Germany following its defeat in World War I.

“Widespread disillusionment had worked to Zhirinovsky’s advantage. After his election, I believed the nationalist leader could – though not necessarily would – become Russia’s Hitler,” Michael McFaul, an U.S. election observer at the time who would go on to become President Barack Obama’s ambassador to Russia from 2012-14, wrote in his book From Cold War To Hot Peace.

McFaul described Zhirinovsky as the “symbolic winner” of the election and said his popularity called into question the prevailing liberal view about “the superiority and inevitability of worldwide democracy.”

For a brief period of time, Zhirinovsky was considered to be a serious challenger to Yeltsin in the 1996 presidential election, Russia’s first since the Soviet collapse.

However, his political star quickly dimmed as his boorish behavior alienated voters.

In the December 1995 Duma elections, the LDPR received 11 percent in the party-list voting – half as many votes as the Communist Party. Six months later, Zhirinovsky came in fifth in the first round of the presidential election, with less than 6 percent of the vote.

Over the years, Zhirinovsky’s tirades and antics turned him into more of an entertainer than a politician in the eyes of Russian voters. To liberal opponents and the nation’s intelligentsia, he was little more than a clown.

His influence further waned with Putin’s political ascent at the end of the 1990s.

Over more than 22 years as president or prime minister, Putin has consolidated power in part by neutering the parliament and co-opting political forces that are nominally in the opposition. The LDPR has rarely opposed the policies of Putin and the dominant, Kremlin-controlled United Russia party. Political observers say the Kremlin has sometimes used Zhirinovsky and his party to send up trial balloons on initiatives it does not want to immediately be associated with the government.

Like Zhirinovsky, Putin also attached importance to the issue of ethnic Russians who found themselves living outside the country after the fall of the Soviet Union -- a situation that he says prompted his remark that the collapse of the U.S.S.R. was the “greatest geopolitical catastrophe” of the 20th century.

“The difference was that, until 2014, Putin had always claimed that talk of ‘bringing back’ these lands with lots of Russians in the so-called ‘near abroad’ was not politically realistic," said Brian Taylor, a professor of political science at Syracuse University who focuses on Russia. Since 2014, when Putin sent the military to seize control of Crimea and Moscow fomented separatism in the Donbas, Putin's rhetoric with respect to Russians and Russian speakers in Ukraine "has become more strident, which rhetorically moved him closer to Zhirinovsky, although usually without the extreme flourishes that Zhirinovsky was famous for,” Taylor said in early February.

Zhirinovsky had called for the partitioning of Ukraine and made other remarks that bore similarities to more recent comments from Putin, who launched a large-scale invasion of Ukraine on February 24 after increasingly aggressive rhetoric in which he repeatedly suggesting that the neighboring country has no right to exist as a sovereign state.

In a diatribe in the Duma in December, as Russia amassed forces at Ukraine’s borders, Zhirinovsky suggested Moscow would invade at 4 a.m. on February 22 -- a prediction that was off by only about 48 hours. Zhirinovsky ran against Putin for president in 2000, 2012, and 2018, and against placeholder Dmitry Medvedev in 2008 – campaigns widely seen as part of Kremlin efforts to create the appearance of pluralism and competition. By contrast, opposition leader Aleksei Navalny was barred from the 2018 ballot over convictions on financial-crimes charges he say were fabricated to sideline him.

Zhirinovsky was born in what was then the Soviet republic of Kazakhstan on April 25, 1946, a year after the end of World War II, to a father with a Ukrainian Jewish background and an ethnic Russian mother.

Zhirinovsky initially denied his Jewish heritage and rarely talked about his father, Volf Eidelshtein, who moved to the newly formed state of Israel a few years after his son’s birth.

Zhirinovsky took the last name of his mother’s first husband when he turned 18.

He moved to the Soviet capital in the 1960s to attend Moscow State University, where he majored in Turkish studies, and he briefly worked in Turkey. He received a law degree in 1977 and a philosophy degree much later, in 1998, after defending a dissertation on “the past, present, and future of the Russian nation.”

In March 1990, Zhirinovsky was elected head of the Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union, which he had helped create – reportedly with the backing of the KGB – a few months earlier. It was the first legal opposition party in the Soviet Union.

He ran for president of what was still the Soviet republic of Russia in June 1991, coming in third with 8 percent of the vote in an election won by Yeltsin.

The Soviet Union ceased to exist six months later and the political upheaval continued, with Yeltsin ordering the shelling of the parliament building in October 1993 during a showdown with anti-reform opponents that led to parliamentary election that December.

Zhirinovsky is survived by his wife, Galina Lebedeva, and three grown children. The Shiveluch volcano on the Kamchatka Peninsula in the Russian Far East has become extremely active, threatening a powerful eruption, the Kamchatka Volcanic Eruption Response Team said on November 20. Shiveluch, one of Kamchatka's largest volcanoes with a summit reaching 3,283 meters is also one of the peninsula's most active ones, with an estimated 60 substantial eruptions in the past 10,000 years. The volcano's last most powerful eruption took place in 2007. To read the original Reuters story, click here. Iranian director Emad Aleebrahim Dehkordi won the Etoile d'Or top award at the Marrakech International Film Festival late on November 19 for his debut feature A Tale Of Shemroon and dedicated his prize to "all the women of Iran." The film explores the life of a young Iranian living in Shemroon, north of Tehran, who gets pulled deeper into the drug trade while trying to make some easy money through his connections with Tehran's wealthy youth. Authorities in Azerbaijan have accused France of using the International Organization of La Francophonie (OIF) as "an instrument of its foreign policy," saying that it will consider the documents adopted by it as "politically biased."                Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinian has discussed issues related to security in the South Caucasus with French President Emmanuel Macron and other leaders on the sidelines of a summit in Tunisia, which took over the organization's rotating presidency from Armenia.                       Kazakhstan is holding a snap presidential election with Qasym-Zhomart Toqaev all but certain to win a second term in office, as he faces no real opposition in the race.                         U.S. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin has said failure to help Ukraine secure its own future could lead to a "world of tyranny and turmoil." Austin was speaking on November 19 at the annual Halifax Security Forum in Canada. Russian President Vladimir "Putin's fellow autocrats are watching. And they could well conclude that getting nuclear weapons would give them a hunting license of their own. And that could drive a dangerous spiral of nuclear proliferation," he said. The comments were some of his most powerful to date on Russia's nearly nine-month-old invasion. The head of Iran's national boxing federation has said he is refusing to return to his country, in support of anti-government protests that have roiled the country for weeks. Hossein Soori made the announcement in an interview with RFE/RL's Radio Farda on November 19. Currently in Spain for a youth boxing tournament, Thori said Iranian government officials "lacked honor." Soori's announcement comes amid a deadly crackdown in Iran on spreading protests connected to the death of Mahsa Amini, who died in police custody in September for "improperly" wearing a head scarf. Weeks of demonstrations have become some of the biggest, and most sustained, since the 1979 revolution. British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has made his first visit to Kyiv since taking office, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said. "Since the first days of the war, Ukraine and the U.K. have been the strongest of allies," Zelensky said in a Facebook post on November 19. "During today's meeting, we discussed the most important issues both for our countries and for global security." Iranian security forces have shot dead at least three people in the western province of Kurdistan in the latest deadly protests sparked by the death of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini, a rights group said. Hengaw, a Norway-based rights group that monitors abuses in Kurdish areas, told AFP on November 19 that "the government's repressive forces opened fire on protesters in the town of Divandarreh, killing at least three civilians." Russia's surge in missile strikes in Ukraine is partly designed to exhaust Kyiv's supplies of air defenses and finally achieve dominance of the skies above the country, a senior Pentagon official has said. Ukraine says the strikes have crippled almost half of its energy system, creating a potential humanitarian disaster as winter sets in. Colin Kahl, the Pentagon's top policy adviser, told reporters on November 19 during a trip to the Middle East that Moscow also hoped to deplete Ukrainian air defenses that have so far prevented the Russian military from establishing dominance of the skies above Ukraine. To read the original Reuters story, click here. Bulgaria has charged five people with helping one of the suspects in last weekend's bombing in central Istanbul which killed six people and wounded 81, prosecutors said.    A gas explosion in an apartment building has killed at least nine people, including four children, on the island of Sakhalin in far eastern Russia, regional authorities said.      Asia-Pacific leaders have added their voices to international pressure on Russia over its invasion of Ukraine, issuing a summit statement saying "most" of them condemned the war. The 21 members of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum issued a joint declaration on November 19 after a day and half of talks in Bangkok criticizing the conflict and the global economic turmoil it has unleashed. Britain's foreign minister has hit out at Iran for "spreading bloodshed" and vowed to work with allies to counter Tehran as he addressed leaders in Bahrain. Ukraine and its Western allies have accused Iran of supplying Russia with drones that they say Moscow has used in recent weeks to carry out attacks in Ukraine. "Iranian-supplied weapons threaten the entire region," British Foreign Secretary James Cleverly told the annual Manama Dialogue conference in Bahrain on November 19. "The regime has resorted to selling Russia the armed drones that are killing civilians in Ukraine." Former President Igor Dodon has been released from house arrest in connection with multiple criminal charges but ordered to not leave the country for 60 days.           Ukraine has restored train service to the newly recaptured southern city of Kherson, and Ukrainian forces face fierce fighting in eastern Donbas, where Russian troops have intensified their push on several fronts.                             Yale researchers with U.S. State Department backing say they have documented allegations of extrajudicial detentions and disappearances under Russian occupation in the southeastern Ukrainian city of Kherson that are "consistent with an intentional and targeted campaign."

The team, from the Yale School of Public Health’s Humanitarian Research Lab (HRL) through a program called the Conflict Observatory, noted accusations ahead of Russia's February 24 all-out invasion of Ukraine that Moscow planned to capture or kill potential opposition figures and prominent residents in occupied areas.

The report documents the detentions and disappearances of 226 individuals in the Kherson region between March and October.

The demographic and professional profiles of these individuals demonstrate a pattern that reflects the pre-meditated campaign alleged before the invasion,"the report says.

"These findings demonstrate a range of alarming allegations about treatment of detainees, including allegations of deaths in custody; the widespread use of torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment (CIDT); pillage from detainees; sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV); forced participation in propaganda videos; enforced disappearances; potential reprisal detentions; threats to relatives; and monitoring, tampering with, or seizure of electronic devices."

The only major regional hub overrun so far in the nearly nine-month-old invasion, Kherson was recaptured by Ukrainian forces earlier this month after a surprise withdrawal of thousands of Russian troops,

It was the latest in a flurry of publicly bruising victories by Ukrainian defenders over the Russian invaders.

Interior Minister Denys Monastyrsky said on national television on November 18 that investigators in Kherson region had uncovered 63 bodies with signs of torture after Russian forces left.     The de facto leadership of ethnic Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh is ready to negotiate with Azerbaijan, but only in an international format with the participation of mediators, a senior representative in Stepanakert said on November 18.

The official, Davit Babayan, was responding to Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev’s statement that Baku was ready to talk to Armenians living in Nagorno-Karabakh but considered it an internal affair.

“What Aliyev suggests is nothing but an ultimate surrender for us in which a aboriginal group who have realized their 'guilt' will show repentance and beg Mother Azerbaijan to forgive them and allow them to live in the Azerbaijani land,” Babayan, the ethnic Armenians' de facto foreign minister in the region, told RFE/RL’s Armenian Service in an interview.

He said that instead, Stepanakert suggests using the format of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), even though it has been largely inactive since the 2020 Armenian-Azerbaijan war over Nagorno-Karabakh.

Armenia and Azerbaijan have been locked in a conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh for decades. Some 30,000 people were killed in a war in the early 1990s that left ethnic Armenians in control of the breakaway region and seven adjacent districts of Azerbaijan proper.

The two sides fought another war in 2020 that lasted six weeks and killed thousands of people on both sides before a Russia-brokered cease-fire, resulting in Armenians' losing control over parts of the region and the adjacent districts.  U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland said on November 18 that he has named former Hague war-crimes prosecutor Jack Smith to oversee two investigations related to possible interference in the transfer of power after the U.S. presidential election in 2020 and to the removal of classified documents after Donald Trump left office. The Justice Department said Trump's new run for the presidency prompted Garland's decision to use a special counsel. Smith has stepped down from his role investigating war crimes in Kosovo. which he had been doing since 2018.

To see the Justice Department announcement, click here: https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/appointment-special-counsel-0 Polish officials on November 18 inspected the initial installation phase of high-tech monitoring equipment along a metal wall on the border with Belarus geared toward preventing thousands of migrants from crossing into the European Union country. Polish authorities have accused Belarus's authoritarian leader Aleksandr Lukashenka of pushing thousands of migrants into Poland and by extension destabilizing the EU. To see the original AP story, click here. The construction of a planned barbed-wired fence along Finland's long border with Russia will start early next year, Finnish border guard officials said on November 18, amid concerns in the Nordic country over the changing security environment in Europe. Finland’s 1,340-kilometer border with Russia is the longest of any European Union member. To see the original AP story, click here. MINSK -- A 69-year-old retired teacher has been sentenced by a Belarusian court to two years in prison for comments that "insulted" disputed leader Alyaksandr Lukashenka and a KGB officer killed in a police shoot-out at a Minsk apartment that also left an IT worker dead.    An anti-government protest erupted at the funeral of a 9-year-old Iranian boy whose mother blames security forces for shooting him dead after their family vehicle was stopped near an ongoing protest. User-generated videos showed hundreds of people gathered at Kian Pirfalak's funeral on November 18 in the southwestern city of Izeh, where his mother read out an adaptation of a famous children's poem to criticize Iran's leadership. To see the original AP story, click here. Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has spoken by phone with his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, and both men congratulated each other on the extension of a UN-brokered grain deal, Erdogan's office said on November 18. The Turkish president told Zelenskiy that both the grain deal and a prisoner exchange between Russia and Ukraine were positive experiences, and that the "extension of this understanding to the negotiation table" would benefit all parties. To see the original Reuters story, click here. BISHKEK -- The Uzbek Senate has approved agreements with Kyrgyzstan on border demarcation and jointly managing the Kempir-Abad water reservoir, an issue that has been a hot-button issue between the two neighbors.  Load more   Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty © 2022 RFE/RL, Inc. All Rights Reserved.              REGIONS                   NEWS              April 06, 2022  Vladimir Zhirinovsky had been one of the most visible and well-known figures in Russian politics over the past three decades.    Zhirinovsky arrives on a troika, a traditional Russian carriage pulled by three horses, to the LDPR convention in Moscow on September 13, 2021.  Zhirinovsky shakes hands with President Vladimir Putin in 2018. He ran against Putin for president in 2000, 2012, and 2018.  Zhirinovsky bathes in freezing water during celebrations of Orthodox Epiphany in Moscow in 2016.  Over the years, Zhirinovsky’s tirades and antics turned him into more of an entertainer than a politician in the eyes of Russian voters. To liberal opponents and the nation’s intelligentsia, he was little more than a clown.             November 20, 2022  An ash cloud rises from the erupted Shiveluch volcano on the Kamchatka Peninsula in January 2013.               November 20, 2022  Emad Aleebrahim Dehkordi won the Etoile d'Or top award at the Marrakech International Film Festival on November 19.               November 20, 2022  Armenian Foreign Minister Ararat Mirzoyan (file photo)     Read more            November 20, 2022  French President Emmanuel Macron (left) and Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinian talk in Djerba, Tunisia., on November 19.        Read more            November 20, 2022  A voter submits a ballot in Kazakhstan's presidential election on November 20 in Almaty.           Read more            November 19, 2022  U.S. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin (file photo)         3      November 19, 2022  The president of the Iranian Boxing Federation, Hossein Souri               November 19, 2022  Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy (right) welcomes British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak to Kyiv on November 19.               November 19, 2022  An unveiled woman stands on top of a vehicle as thousands make their way towards the cemetery in Saghez, Mahsa Amini's hometown in Kurdistan Province, to mark 40 days since her death in late October.               November 19, 2022  A worker walks past damaged equipment at a high-voltage substation of the operator Ukrenerho after a missile attack in central Ukraine on November 10.               November 19, 2022  Police block the street after an explosion on a busy pedestrian street in Istanbul, Turkey, on November 13.   Read more            November 19, 2022  A section of the five-story building in the town of Tymovskoye collapsed after a gas cylinder exploded in one of the apartments.   Read more            November 19, 2022  Chinese President Xi Jinping (left) meets with Thai Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha on the sidelines of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit in Bangkok on November 19.               November 19, 2022  U.K. Foreign Secretary James Cleverly (file photo)               November 19, 2022  Ex-President Igor Dodon is escorted by law enforcement officers before a court hearing in Chisinau in May.   Read more            UPDATED November 19, 2022 UPDATED  People take selfies in front of the first train to travel to liberated Kherson in Kyiv on November 18.                      Read more            November 18, 2022  A coffin containing the body of a local resident in Kherson who died during Russian occupation is lowered into a grave on November 17 following the liberation of the city by Ukrainian forces.                                                                            Read more            November 18, 2022  Davit Babayan is the de facto foreign minister of the breakaway Nagorno-Karabakh region. (file photo)    Read more            November 18, 2022  Former Hague war-crimes prosecutor Jack Smith (file photo)               November 18, 2022  A Polish border guard patrols the area near a metal wall on the border between Poland and Belarus. (file photo)               November 18, 2022  Finland’s border with Russia is the longest of any European Union member. (file photo)               November 18, 2022  Retired Belarusian teacher Ema Stsepulyonak (file photo)                                                                            Read more            November 18, 2022  Kian Pirfalak was shot dead after his family's vehicle was stopped near an ongoing protest.               November 18, 2022  Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan (left) with his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zeleskiy (file photo)               November 18, 2022  The Kempir-Abad reservoir is a vital regional water source located in the fertile Ferghana Valley.   Read more             1
Dutch Court Sentences Two Russians, One Ukrainian To Life In Prison In MH17 Shoot-Down 1 2
The Week In Russia: The Sledgehammer War  2 3
Ukrainian Artillerists Battle For Control Of Key Luhansk Highway 3  4
Yuri Knorozov: The Maverick Scholar Who Cracked The Maya Code 4 5
Chechen Separatist Fighters Defend Ukraine Against 'Common Enemy' Russia 5 6
'No One Is Listening To Us': Since Mobilization, Russian Women Have Stepped Up Protests Against Ukraine War 6 7
Swedish Prosecutor Confirms Nord Stream Blasts Were Sabotage 7 8
Ukraine Restores Train Service To Recaptured Southern City As Fierce Fighting Continues In East 8 9
'How Could You?': Mother Blames Iranian Authorities For Killing Her 9-Year-Old Son 9 10
The Drones Of The Ukraine War 10    Subscribe         Subscribe        FOLLOW US        QUICK HITS     BROWSE    