https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-61008292
 Ultranationalist Russian political leader Vladimir Zhirinovsky has died aged 75, after a career built on fiery remarks and absurd antics. He stood for the presidency six times and was part of the official opposition tolerated by President Vladimir Putin. Last December he appeared to predict Russia would attack Ukraine. He claimed to have had eight Covid-19 vaccinations. He contracted coronavirus and died weeks after being admitted to hospital with pneumonia. His death was finally confirmed by parliament speaker Vyacheslav Volodin on Wednesday, after two reports earlier this year had been discounted. Zhirinovsky was, he said, always in the thick of things: "A man who deeply understood how the world works and foresaw a lot." Zhirinovsky's brand of clownish ultranationalism kept Russians shocked and entertained during more than 30 years of his political career. In the early 1990s he claimed he dreamt of the day "when Russian soldiers can wash their boots in the warm waters of the Indian Ocean". In one of his final appearances before MPs, he said Russia would invade Ukraine and predicted almost to the day when it would happen. "At 04:00 on 22 February you'll feel [our new policy]. I'd like 2022 to be peaceful. But I love the truth, for 70 years I've said the truth. It won't be peaceful. It will be a year when Russia once again becomes great." His career was laced with similar threats to other countries, from the Baltics and Germany to Japan and the Middle East. He achieved international notoriety when he threw juice in the face of a political rival, Boris Nemtsov, during a TV debate. Before he entered politics, he ran a Soviet state-approved Jewish cultural organisation. His Liberal Democratic Party of Russia was the country's first official post-communist political party and was widely viewed first as a Soviet stooge. Russians and the West were shocked when his party won Russia's first democratic elections in 1993. Vladimir Zhirinovsky speaking to me in 2018 post-Salisbury about Russia, the West and about Ukraine. His nationalist views became the mainstream. pic.twitter.com/POUOohm2kh Political commentator Konstantin Eggert labelled him "the Kremlin's pocket nationalist and scandal-monger". With hindsight, said Eggert, his success in 1993 was a precursor of the "barbaric revanchism" that had led to Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Zhirinovsky told the BBC in 2018 that Ukraine was Russian territory: "It's our territory; it's our people. It's part of our country." His career had declined in recent years - even though his party is widely viewed favourably by the Kremlin. He secured a mere 5.6% of the vote in a 2018 presidential election that was marred by irregularities and by a ban on Russia's leading opposition figure, Alexei Navalny, who is now in jail. When a respected Russian journalist accused Zhirinovsky in 2018 of groping him 12 years earlier, the politician's son condemned the remarks as slander. Zhirinovsky: Russia's political eccentric Russian TV sees US plot behind Ukraine and IS militants Historic deal struck to help countries worst-hit by climate change Five key climate takeaways from COP27 Musk lifts Donald Trump's Twitter ban Controversial World Cup set to get under way ‘Dropbox’ babies - the surrendered infants in US How a North Korean defector became a fight champion. Video
How a North Korean defector became a fight champion How ice cream is helping people talk about grief Why Qatar is a controversial choice for the World Cup Were Russian soldiers shot after surrendering? The truth behind the secret language only women know Oh crumbs! The online toaster hoax that went undiscovered for years What does an unheated room do to your body? Sign up to Klinsmann's daily World Cup newsletter World Cup winner Jürgen Klinsmann invites you to subscribe to his daily World Cup newsletter. The source of half the world's lithium The clever homes hidden from pirates © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking. BBC Homepage BBC Homepage  Sign in Home News Sport Reel Worklife Travel Future More menu More menu More menu     Search BBC   BBC News  Home War in Ukraine Coronavirus Climate Video World UK Business Tech Science Stories         World Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada US Elections 2022 Results 6 April 6 April  Share Share     IMAGE SOURCE,
GETTY IMAGES IMAGE SOURCE, Image caption, The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.   Zhirinovsky: Russia's political eccentric Zhirinovsky: Russia's political eccentric 10 March 2000 10 March 2000 Russian TV sees US plot behind Ukraine and IS militants Russian TV sees US plot behind Ukraine and IS militants 25 September 2014 25 September 2014   LIVE
. 
Historic deal struck to help countries worst-hit by climate change LIVE
.  LIVE
.   .  Historic deal struck to help countries worst-hit by climate change Five key climate takeaways from COP27 Five key climate takeaways from COP27 5 minutes ago 5 minutes ago Musk lifts Donald Trump's Twitter ban Musk lifts Donald Trump's Twitter ban 6 hours ago 6 hours ago Controversial World Cup set to get under way Controversial World Cup set to get under way   ‘Dropbox’ babies - the surrendered infants in US ‘Dropbox’ babies - the surrendered infants in US   How a North Korean defector became a fight champion. Video
How a North Korean defector became a fight champion  How a North Korean defector became a fight champion. Video How a North Korean defector became a fight champion     How ice cream is helping people talk about grief How ice cream is helping people talk about grief   Why Qatar is a controversial choice for the World Cup Why Qatar is a controversial choice for the World Cup   Were Russian soldiers shot after surrendering? Were Russian soldiers shot after surrendering?   The truth behind the secret language only women know The truth behind the secret language only women know   Oh crumbs! The online toaster hoax that went undiscovered for years Oh crumbs! The online toaster hoax that went undiscovered for years   What does an unheated room do to your body? What does an unheated room do to your body?   Sign up to Klinsmann's daily World Cup newsletter Sign up to Klinsmann's daily World Cup newsletter   The source of half the world's lithium The source of half the world's lithium   The clever homes hidden from pirates The clever homes hidden from pirates   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10    