https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-63004249
 Hong Kong's government says that from Monday people arriving in Hong Kong will no longer have to go into mandatory hotel quarantine. Travellers will also no longer have to show a negative Covid test before boarding a plane to Hong Kong. Instead they will monitor themselves for possible infection for three days. The news sparked a rush for flight tickets to Hong Kong, with the Cathay Pacific website operating a queuing system to book. The airline said it was adding more than 200 pairs of flights in October to both regional and long haul destinations. "While we will continue to add back more flights as quickly as is feasible, it will take time to rebuild our capacity gradually," a statement said. Hong Kong has had some of the world's toughest rules as it follows China's zero Covid policies. So its departure from what the mainland is doing is a long-awaited decision. Restrictions on people arriving have been in place for more than two years. And there are still rules in place for travellers. They cannot enter common areas such as restaurants or shopping malls for the first three days after arrival. They also have to undergo PCR tests on day two, four six. The prolonged closure of border has however hit Hong Kong's economy hard and left the Asian financial centre at a disadvantage compared with its rivals in the region such as Singapore. Singapore has now unseated the city as Asia's top financial market in the Global Financial Centres Index. "Hong Kong has been isolated from the international community for two-and-half years, and is suffering from it," Hao Hong, chief economist of Grow Investment Group told the BBC. "While the end to hotel quarantine is a step forward, rebuilding confidence takes time, especially against the tide of exodus of talents from Hong Kong." "The easing of travel arrangements will re-establish the level playing field in terms of competing with other cities on connectivity," said Louis Kuijs, chief Asia Pacific economist of S&P Global Ratings. "The fact that Hong Kong can move on this even as mainland China keeps its Covid stance largely unchanged for now strengthens the case for the 'two systems' part of the 'one-country, two systems' arrangement that gives Hong Kong its special status within China. "The city should be able to leverage that role in the coming years, including via the Greater Bay Area initiative." Earlier on Friday Japan announced that it was relaxing entry rules, with tourists able to visit without a visa and without needing to go through a travel agency from 11 October. A cap on daily arrivals will also be lifted. Hong Kong's Peak Tram reopens after 14 months Hong Kong shortens Covid hotel quarantine China hardliner becomes Hong Kong's leader Historic deal struck to help countries worst-hit by climate change Musk lifts Donald Trump's Twitter ban Controversial World Cup set to get under way Controversial World Cup set to get under way ‘Dropbox’ babies - the surrendered infants in US How a North Korean defector became a fight champion. Video
How a North Korean defector became a fight champion How ice cream is helping people talk about grief Why Qatar is a controversial choice for the World Cup Were Russian soldiers shot after surrendering? The truth behind the secret language only women know Oh crumbs! The online toaster hoax that went undiscovered for years What does an unheated room do to your body? Sign up to Klinsmann's daily World Cup newsletter World Cup winner Jürgen Klinsmann invites you to subscribe to his daily World Cup newsletter. The source of half the world's lithium The clever homes hidden from pirates © 2022 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking. BBC Homepage BBC Homepage  Sign in Home News Sport Reel Worklife Travel Future More menu More menu More menu     Search BBC   BBC News  Home War in Ukraine Coronavirus Climate Video World UK Business Tech Science Stories         Asia China India 23 September 23 September  Share Share    Related Topics  IMAGE SOURCE,
REUTERS IMAGE SOURCE, Image caption, Hong Kong's Peak Tram reopens after 14 months Hong Kong's Peak Tram reopens after 14 months 27 August 27 August   Hong Kong shortens Covid hotel quarantine Hong Kong shortens Covid hotel quarantine 8 August 8 August   China hardliner becomes Hong Kong's leader China hardliner becomes Hong Kong's leader 8 May 8 May   LIVE
. 
Historic deal struck to help countries worst-hit by climate change LIVE
.  LIVE
.   .  Historic deal struck to help countries worst-hit by climate change Musk lifts Donald Trump's Twitter ban Musk lifts Donald Trump's Twitter ban 3 hours ago 3 hours ago Controversial World Cup set to get under way Controversial World Cup set to get under way 6 hours ago 6 hours ago Controversial World Cup set to get under way Controversial World Cup set to get under way   ‘Dropbox’ babies - the surrendered infants in US ‘Dropbox’ babies - the surrendered infants in US   How a North Korean defector became a fight champion. Video
How a North Korean defector became a fight champion  How a North Korean defector became a fight champion. Video How a North Korean defector became a fight champion     How ice cream is helping people talk about grief How ice cream is helping people talk about grief   Why Qatar is a controversial choice for the World Cup Why Qatar is a controversial choice for the World Cup   Were Russian soldiers shot after surrendering? Were Russian soldiers shot after surrendering?   The truth behind the secret language only women know The truth behind the secret language only women know   Oh crumbs! The online toaster hoax that went undiscovered for years Oh crumbs! The online toaster hoax that went undiscovered for years   What does an unheated room do to your body? What does an unheated room do to your body?   Sign up to Klinsmann's daily World Cup newsletter Sign up to Klinsmann's daily World Cup newsletter   The source of half the world's lithium The source of half the world's lithium   The clever homes hidden from pirates The clever homes hidden from pirates   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10      Close and sign up for a BBC account later  Register or Sign in